Adds Census FAQ (#362)
chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census: docs/cellxgene_census_FAQ.md

# Frequently Asked Questions for CZ CELLxGENE Discover Census

Last updated: Apr, 2023.

- [Why should I use the Census?](#Why-should-I-use-the-Census)
- [Why does the Census not have a normalized layer or embeddings?](#Why-does-the-Census-not-have-a-normalized-layer-or-embeddings)

> - [How does the Census differentiate from other services?](#How-does-the-Census-differentiate-from-other-services?)

Reviewer: The link does not work. This should be #how-does-the-census-differentiate-from-other-services. The "?" should not be present.

- [Can I query human and mouse data in a single query?](#Can-I-query-human-and-mouse-data-in-a-single-query)
- [Where are the Census data hosted?](#Where-are-the-Census-data-hosted)
- [How can I increase the performance of my queries?](#How-can-I-increase-the-performance-of-my-queries)
- [Can I use conda to install the Census Python API?](#Can-I-use-conda-to-install-the-Census-Python-API)
- [How can I ask for support?](#How-can-I-ask-for-support)
- [How can I ask for new features?](#How-can-I-ask-for-new-features)
- [How can I contribute my data to the Census?](#How-can-I-contribute-my-data-to-the-Census)

> - [Why do I get an `ArraySchema` error when opening the Census?](#Why-do-I-get-an-ArraySchema-error-when-opening-the-Census)

Reviewer 2: A few more possible FAQs:
"May I (How do I) cite Census data in a publication?"
"What are the terms of use for the data?"
"Can I retrieve the original H5AD datasets from which the Census was built?"
"Is there a summary of the data contained in the Census?" (link to notebook showing how retrieve summary info)
"A new dataset is available in CZ Discover, but I don't see it in the Census.  Why?" (We update once per week)

Reviewer: "May I (How do I) cite Census data in a publication?" - use https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/docs/08__Cite%20cellxgene%20in%20your%20publications until we have embedded citations?

## Why should I use the Census?

The Census provides efficient low-latency access via Python and R APIs to most single-cell RNA data from [CZ CELLxGENE Discover](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/). 

> To accelerate your computational research, **you should use the Census**:

Reviewer: I would include the "if you want" or "if you want to" on line 21 rather than repeating it in all the bullet points below.

> - If you want to easily get slices of data from more than 400 single-cell datasets spanning about 50 mi cells from >60 K genes.

Reviewer: Is "mi" intentional? Usually, "M" is the abbreviation.

> - If you want to easily get slices of data from more than 400 single-cell datasets spanning about 50 mi cells from >60 K genes.

Reviewer 2: mention human and mouse?

> - If you want easy access to a subset of data from a dataset or from multiple datasets.

Reviewer: subset of data from one or more datasets

- If you want to get these data with standardized and harmonized cell and gene metadata.
- If you want to easily load multi-dataset slices into Scanpy or Seurat.
- If you want to implement out-of-core (a.k.a online) operations for larger-than-memory processes.

For example you could easily get "*all T-cells from Lung with COVID-19*" into an [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), [Seurat](https://satijalab.org/seurat/), or into memory-sufficient data chunks via [PyArrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/index.html) or [R Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/). 

> **You should not use the Census:**

Reviewer: Same comments about "if you want".

> - If you want access to non-standardized cell metadata and gene metadata available in the original [datasets](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/datasets).

Reviewer: Does "non-standardized" mean "author-contributed" ?

- If you want access to the author-contributed normalized expression vaues.

> - If you want access to all data from a single dataset.

Reviewer 2: Should we enumerate a few things? unsupported assay types, embeddings, etc.

## Why does the Census not have a normalized layer or embeddings?

The Census does not have normalized counts or embeddings because:

> - The original normalized values and embeddings are not harmonized or integrated across datasets and therefore numerically incompatible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The original normalized values and embeddings are not harmonized or integrated across datasets and are therefore numerically incompatible.
```

> - The original normalized values and embeddings are not harmonized or integrated across datasets and therefore numerically incompatible.

Reviewer: The original normalized values and embeddings are neither harmonized nor integrated across datasets; therefore, they are numerically incompatible.

> - We have not chosen nor implemented a general-purpose normalization or embedding generation method to be used across all Census data.

Reviewer: _not chosen nor implemented_ is redundant. The critical part is that the census has not implemented it.

If you have any suggestions for methods that our team should explore please share them with us via a [feature request in the github repository](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/issues/new?assignees=&labels=user+request&template=feature-request.md&title=).

> ## How does the Census differentiate from other services?

Reviewer: Why not replace **Why should I use the Census?** with this section. It basically is stating the same points.

Author: A little different, Why should I use the Census goes also into author meatadata, raw counts, embeddings which are available at Discover.

This one here is motivated to compare outside the whole product.

Reviewer: Except it repeats/restates the earlier bullets.

Author: I think some level of repetition is ok in a FAQ

> The Census differentiates from existing single-cell services by providing access to the largest corpus of standardized single-cell data from CZ CELLxGENE Discover via [TileDB-SOMA](https://github.com/single-cell-data/TileDB-SOMA/issues/new/choose). 

Reviewer: As written, the differentiation is _access to the largest corpus of standardized single-cell data **from CZ CELLxGENE Discover**_ rather than _access to the largest corpus of standardized single-cell data_ ?

Intentional?

Author: I see, the intention here is "the largest corpus of standardized single-cell data" which is CZ CELLxGENE Discover. I will just remove the product name

Reviewer: You could also stress that point - 

"the largest corpus of standardized single-cell data, which is ONLY available from CZ ..."

> Thus, single-cell data from about 50 mi cells across >60 K genes, with 11 standardized cell metadata variables and harmonized GENCODE annotations is at your finger tips to:

Reviewer: Same comment about "mi".

- Open and read data at low latency from the cloud.
- Query and access data using metadata filters.
- Load and create AnnData objects.
- Load and create Seurat objects.

> - From Python create PyArrow objects, SciPy sparse matrices, NumPy arrays, and pandas data frames.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- From Python create PyArrow objects, SciPy sparse matrices, NumPy arrays, and Pandas data frames.
```

- From R create R Arrow objects, sparse matrices (via the Matrix package), and standard data frames and (dense) matrices.

## Can I query human and mouse data in a single query?

> At the moment it is not possible to query both mouse and human data in one query. This is due to the data from these organisms using different [organism-specific gene annotations](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md#required-gene-annotations).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is not possible to query both mouse and human data in one query. This is due to the data from these organisms using different [organism-specific gene annotations](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md#required-gene-annotations).
```

> At the moment it is not possible to query both mouse and human data in one query. This is due to the data from these organisms using different [organism-specific gene annotations](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md#required-gene-annotations).

Reviewer: "At the moment" suggests that the census plans to solve this in the future? Is that true?

## Where are the Census data hosted?

The Census data is publicly hosted free-of-cost in an Amazon Web Services (AWS) S3 bucket in the [`us-west-2` region](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/using-regions-availability-zones.html#concepts-available-regions).

## How can I increase the performance of my queries?

Since the access patterns are via the internet, usually the main limiting step for data queries is bandwidth and client location.

We recommend the following to increase query efficency: 

- Utilize a computer connected to high-speed internet.
- Utilize an ethernet connection and not a wifi connection.
- If possible utilize online computing located in the west coast of the US.
   - Highly recommended: [EC2 AWS instances](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/) in the `us-west-2` region.

## Can I use conda to install the Census Python API?

> Currently there is not conda package available for `cellxgene-census`. However you can use conda in combination with `pip` to install the package in a conda environment:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently there is not a conda package available for `cellxgene-census`. However you can use conda in combination with `pip` to install the package in a conda environment:
```

> Currently there is not conda package available for `cellxgene-census`. However you can use conda in combination with `pip` to install the package in a conda environment:

Reviewer: there is not -> there is no

```bash
conda create -n census_env python=3.10
conda activate census_env
pip install cellxgene-census
```

## How can I ask for support?

You can either submit a [github issue](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/issues/new/choose) or post in the slack channel `#cellxgene-census-users` at the [CZI Slack community](https://cziscience.slack.com/join/shared_invite/zt-czl1kp2v-sgGpY4RxO3bPYmFg2XlbZA#/shared-invite/email).

## How can I ask for new features?

You can submit a [feature request in the github repository](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/issues/new?assignees=&labels=user+request&template=feature-request.md&title=).

## How can I contribute my data to the Census?

> You first need to submit your data to [CZ CELLxGENE Discover](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/), then it will automatically get included in the Census if it meets the [biological criteria defined in the Census schema](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/blob/main/docs/cellxgene_census_schema.md#data-included). 

Reviewer: "You first need to submit" sounds like everyone can submit which may not be true in the future. 

_We confirm that we will accept your data._

> To submit your data to CZ CELLxGENE Discover you need to follow these [instructions](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/docs/032__Contribute%20and%20Publish%20Data). 

Reviewer: This section should start with this instruction.

## Why do I get an `ArraySchema` error when opening the Census?

You may get this error if you are trying to open a Census data build with an old version of the Census API. Please update your Python or R Census package.

> If the error persists please file a [github issue ](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/issues/new/choose).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the error persists please file a [github issue](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/issues/new/choose).
```

## How can I contribute my data to the Census?

> To inquire submitting your data to CZ CELLxGENE Discover you need to follow these [instructions](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/docs/032__Contribute%20and%20Publish%20Data). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To inquire about submitting your data to CZ CELLxGENE Discover you need to follow these [instructions](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/docs/032__Contribute%20and%20Publish%20Data). 
```

Reviewer 2: If I'm reading the diff correctly, this line is repeated.

Author: Yup I will delete the one below, thanks!

> You first need to inquire submitting your data to [CZ CELLxGENE Discover](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/), then if the process goes through the data will automatically get included in the Census if it meets the [biological criteria defined in the Census schema](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/blob/main/docs/cellxgene_census_schema.md#data-included). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You first need to inquire about submitting your data to [CZ CELLxGENE Discover](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/). If you data submission is accepted, the data will automatically get included in the Census if it meets the [biological criteria defined in the Census schema](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census/blob/main/docs/cellxgene_census_schema.md#data-included). 
```
